Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

arXiv:2502.04878v1 [cs.LG] 7 Feb 2025

S PARSE AUTOENCODERS D O N OT F IND C ANONICAL
U NITS OF A NALYSIS
Patrick Leask∗
Department of Computer Science
Durham University
patrickaaleask@gmail.com

Bart Bussmann∗
Independent
bartbussmann@gmail.com

Michael Pearce
Independent

Joseph Bloom
Decode Research

Noura Al Moubayed
Department of Computer Science
Durham University

Lee Sharkey
Apollo Research

Curt Tigges
Decode Research

Neel Nanda

A BSTRACT
A common goal of mechanistic interpretability is to decompose the activations of
neural networks into features: interpretable properties of the input computed by
the model. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are a popular method for finding these
features in LLMs, and it has been postulated that they can be used to find a canonical set of units: a unique and complete list of atomic features. We cast doubt
on this belief using two novel techniques: SAE stitching to show they are incomplete, and meta-SAEs to show they are not atomic. SAE stitching involves
inserting or swapping latents from a larger SAE into a smaller one. Latents from
the larger SAE can be divided into two categories: novel latents, which improve
performance when added to the smaller SAE, indicating they capture novel information, and reconstruction latents, which can replace corresponding latents in
the smaller SAE that have similar behavior. The existence of novel features indicates incompleteness of smaller SAEs. Using meta-SAEs - SAEs trained on
the decoder matrix of another SAE - we find that latents in SAEs often decompose into combinations of latents from a smaller SAE, showing that larger SAE
latents are not atomic. The resulting decompositions are often interpretable; e.g.
a latent representing “Einstein” decomposes into “scientist”, “Germany”, and “famous person”. Even if SAEs do not find canonical units of analysis, they may
still be useful tools. We suggest that future research should either pursue different approaches for identifying such units, or pragmatically choose the SAE size
suited to their task. We provide an interactive dashboard to explore meta-SAEs:
https://metasaes.streamlit.app/

1

I NTRODUCTION

Mechanistic interpretability aims to reverse-engineer neural networks into human-interpretable algorithms (Olah et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Elhage et al.,
2021). A key challenge of mechanistic interpretability is identifying the correct units of analysis —
fundamental components that can be individually understood and collectively explain the network’s
function. Ideally, these units would be unique, with no variations (Bricken et al., 2023); complete,
encompassing all necessary features (Elhage et al., 2022); and atomic or irreducible, indivisible into
smaller components (Engels et al., 2024). We refer to a set of units with all of these properties as
canonical.
Initially, researchers hoped that individual MLP neurons (Meng et al., 2022; Olah et al., 2020) and
attention heads (Wang et al., 2022; Olsson et al., 2022) could serve as these units. However, these
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 1: Decomposition of an SAE latent representing “Einstein” into a set of interpretable metalatents. The edges connecting the nodes indicate shared activation by a meta-latent, with thicker
lines representing stronger connections. It demonstrates the ability of meta-SAEs to uncover the
underlying compositional structure of SAE latents, revealing how a complex concept can be represented as a sparse combination of meta-latents. We built a dashboard where you can explore all
meta-latents: https://metasaes.streamlit.app

proved insufficient for interpretability due to polysemanticity, where a single neuron responds to
multiple unrelated concepts (Olah et al., 2020; Elhage et al., 2022).
Recently, sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a promising alternative by decomposing the
activations of LLMs into a dictionary of interpretable and monosemantic features (Bricken et al.,
2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). A key hyperparameter when training SAEs is the dictionary size,
i.e. number of latent units. Previous work conjectured that SAEs might identify a set of “true
features” with sufficient dictionary size (Bricken et al., 2023), i.e. the canonical features that are the
goal of much mechanistic interpretability research.
One challenge to the theory that SAEs identify a canonical set of units is the phenomenon of feature
splitting, where latents from smaller SAEs “split” into multiple, more fine-grained latents in larger
SAEs (Bricken et al., 2023). For example, Bricken et al. (2023) find a base64 feature that splits
into three features in a larger SAE: activating on letters, digits, and encoded ASCII in base64 text.
Furthermore, Templeton (2024) finds that a larger SAE has latents that activate on certain specific
individual chemical elements that a smaller SAE did not represent. Currently, the effect of dictionary
size on the features has not been systematically studied, in part because we lack good methods to
compare latents found in SAEs of different sizes.
To better understand how SAEs of different sizes capture features, we develop a method called
SAE stitching. When stitching SAEs, we systematically swap clusters of latents between SAEs
of different dictionary sizes based on their cosine similarity. Through this method, we observe that
larger SAEs learn both more fine-grained versions of latents found in smaller SAEs, but also entirely
novel latents. The existence of novel latents suggests that the reconstruction error of smaller SAEs
is partially due to missing out information altogether, not just imperfect approximations to features
or overly coarse latents, indicating incompleteness.
Contrary to the story of feature splitting, we observed that some reconstruction latents had split
from multiple latents in the smaller SAE, indicating those latents were composing into more complex latents. Previous work has predicted that the sparsity penalty incentivizes latents to represent
composed features, even if they are independent (Wattenberg & Viégas, 2024; Bricken et al., 2023;
Anders et al., 2024). For instance, consider a neural network that represents color and shape fea2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 2: Example of composition of latents in SAEs of different sizes. The smaller SAE has six
latents, three of which reconstruct shape features, and three of which reconstruct color features.
Reconstructing a shape of a specific color requires two active latents (e.g. blue and square). On the
other hand, the larger SAE has nine latents, each of which reconstructs a different color and shape
combination. In the larger SAE, only a single active latent is required to reconstruct the colored
shape (e.g. blue square). The sparsity penalty incentivizes larger SAEs to learn compositions of
latents rather than atomic latents.
tures, each with three values (red/green/blue and circle/square/triangle). A small SAE might learn a
latent for each value. A large SAE, however, might learn latents for all 9 color-shape combinations
(i.e. blue square) instead of the 6 fundamental features (Smith, 2024). The large SAE can represent
this is sparser as only one latent activates per input rather than two, see Figure 2.
To investigate this, we introduce meta-SAEs, which are SAEs trained to find sparse decompositions
of the decoder directions of another SAE. These decompositions are often interpretable, e.g. a latent representing “Einstein” decomposes into meta-latents representing “scientist”, “Germany”, and
“prominent figures”, among others (see Figure 1). This shows that latents are often not atomic, especially in larger SAEs. We find that meta-latents are similar to latents in smaller SAEs, demonstrating
that latents from larger SAEs can be interpreted as the composition of latents from smaller SAEs.
In summary, our contributions are:
1. SAE stitching, as a method for comparing latents across different sizes of SAE. Latents in
a larger SAE are either novel latents, missing in smaller SAEs, or reconstruction latents,
similar to some latents in smaller SAEs.
2. Meta-SAEs, as an approach for decomposing the decoder directions of SAEs into interpretable, monosemantic meta-latents.
Our empirical results suggest that simply training larger SAEs is unlikely to result in a canonical set
of units for all mechanistic interpretability tasks, and that the choice of dictionary size is subjective.
We suggest taking a pragmatic approach to applying SAEs to mechanistic interpretability tasks,
trying SAEs of several widths to see which is best suited. We are uncertain whether canonical units
of analysis exist, but our results suggest that alternative approaches should be explored.

2

S PARSE AUTOENCODERS

Sparse dictionary learning is the problem of finding a decomposition of a signal that is both sparse
and overcomplete (Olshausen & Field, 1997). Lee et al. (2007) initially applied the sparsity constraint to deep belief networks, with SAEs later being applied to the reconstruction of neural network
activations (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). In the context of large language models,
SAEs decompose model activations x ∈ Rn into sparse linear combinations of learned directions,
which are often interpretable and monosemantic.
An SAE consists of an encoder and a decoder:
f (x) := σ(Wenc x + benc ),

(1)

x̂(f ) := Wdec f + bdec .

(2)

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

where f (x) ∈ Rm is the sparse latent representation and x̂(f ) ∈ Rn is the reconstructed input. Wenc
is the encoder matrix with dimension n × m and benc is a vector of dimension m; conversely Wdec
is the decoder matrix with dimension m × n and bdec is of dimension n. The activation function σ
enforces non-negativity and sparsity in f (x), and a latent i is active on a sample x if fi (x) > 0.
SAEs are trained on the activations of a language model at a particular site, such as the residual
stream, on a large text corpus, using a loss function of the form
L(x) := ∥x − x̂(f (x))∥22 + λS(f (x)) +αLaux
|
{z
} | {z }
Lreconstruct

(3)

Lsparsity

where S is a function of the latent coefficients that penalizes non-sparse decompositions, and λ is a
sparsity coefficient, where higher values of λ encourage sparsity at the cost of higher reconstruction
error. Some architectures also require the use of an auxiliary loss Laux , for example to recycle
inactive latents in TopK SAEs (Gao et al., 2024). We expand on the different SAE variants in
Appendix A.2 and provide a glossary of terms in Appendix A.1.

3

R ELATED W ORK

SAEs for Mechanistic Interpretability. SAEs have been demonstrated to recover sparse, monosemantic, and interpretable features from language model activations (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Templeton, 2024; Gao et al., 2024; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a;b), however their
application to mechanistic interpretability is nascent. After training, researchers often interpret the
meaning of SAE latents by examining the dataset examples on which they are active, either through
manual inspection using features dashboards (Bricken et al., 2023) or automated interpretability
techniques (Gao et al., 2024). SAEs have been used for circuit analysis (Marks et al., 2024) in the
vein of (Olah et al., 2020; Olsson et al., 2022); to study the role of attention heads in GPT-2 (Kissane
et al., 2024); and to replicate the identification of a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2
(Makelov et al., 2024). Transcoders, a variant of SAEs, have been used to simplify circuit analysis
and applied to the greater-than circuit in GPT-2 (Dunefsky et al., 2024). While these applications
highlight SAEs as valuable tools for understanding language models, it remains unclear whether
they identify canonical units of analysis.
Representational Structure. Language models trained on the next-token prediction task learn representations that model the generative process of the data. For example, Li et al. (2022) found that
transformers trained by next-move prediction to play the board game Othello explicitly represent the
board state; and Gurnee & Tegmark (2023) used linear probes to predict geographical and temporal
information from language model activations. SAEs learn these structures as well, for example,
the activations of a cluster of GPT-2 SAE latents form a cycle when reconstruction activations for
weekday name tokens (Engels et al., 2024). Bricken et al. (2023) find evidence of convergent global
structure by applying a 2-dimensional UMAP transformation to decoder directions of SAEs of different sizes. This results in a rich structure of latent projections with regions of latents relating to
similar concepts close to each other.
Tuning Dictionary Size. Previous work on tuning dictionary size has mixed findings regarding
how SAEs scale with dictionary size. For instance, Templeton (2024) observed that larger SAEs
learn latents absent in smaller ones, such as specific chemical elements. Conversely, Bricken et al.
(2023) found similar latents across various SAE sizes, noting that latents in smaller SAEs sometimes
split into multiple latents as the dictionary size increases (Appendix A.3 includes such examples
taken from our SAEs). Currently, the effect of dictionary size on the learned latents has not been
systematically studied.
Model Stitching. Model stitching is a method by which layers from one neural network are
“stitched” or swapped into another neural network. Lenc & Vedaldi (2015); Bansal et al. (2021)
propose that model stitching can be used to quantify representation similarity across different neural network architectures and training regimes by demonstrating that if two networks trained on the
same task can be stitched together with minimal loss in performance, it suggests a high degree of
alignment in their intermediate representations.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 3: SAE stitching operation: connected subgraphs of latents can be swapped between SAEs
based on cosine similarity

4

SAE S TITCHING

Templeton (2024) finds that a larger SAE has latents that activate on certain specific individual
chemical elements that a smaller SAE did not represent. Conversely, Bricken et al. (2023) observes
that smaller SAEs learn latents activating on broad mathematical text, while larger SAEs learn latents
activating on more specific mathematical categories. On the one hand, this suggests that training
large SAEs is necessary to learn latents relating to all relevant concepts. On the other hand, this
means that some of the capacity of larger SAEs is used to represent similar information as smaller
SAEs, but with more latents.
To compare latents of SAEs with different dictionary sizes, we introduce SAE stitching. In SAE
stitching, we add or replace latents in one SAE with latents from another and observe the effect
on the reconstruction performance. We find that larger SAEs learn both finer-grained versions of
latents from smaller SAEs (reconstruction latents) and entirely new latents that capture additional
information (novel latents). SAE stitching allows us to identify these two categories of latents in
larger SAEs.
4.1

S TITCHING O PERATION

The output of an SAE can be expressed as a sum of the contributions from the individual latents:

x̂ :=

d
X

Widec fi (x) + bdec

(4)

i=0

where d is the size of the SAE dictionary, Widec is an individual decoder direction, fi (x) is the
activation value for the latent i, and bdec is the decoder bias term. To stitch latents from one SAE
into another, we modify the reconstruction as follows:
dec
x̂ := αbdec
0 + (1 − α)b1 +

X

dec
W0,l
f (x) +
0 0,l0

l0 ∈L0

X

dec
W1,l
f (x)
1 1,l1

(5)

l1 ∈L1

0|
dec
dec
where α = |L0|L
|+|L1 | , W0,l0 and W1,l1 represent individual decoder directions and L0 and L1 are
the set of latents we include from the respective SAEs. Unlike with model stitching (Bansal et al.,
2021), SAE decoder directions are privileged and require no transformations to stitch.

We experiment with stitching on eight SAEs trained on the residual stream of layer 8 of GPT 2 Small
(Radford et al., 2019) with dictionary sizes ranging from 768 to 98,304 and two of the Gemma Scope
SAEs (Lieberum et al., 2024) trained on Gemma 2 2B (Team et al., 2024) with dictionary size 16,384
and 32,768. For the full list of SAE properties and training details see Appendix A.5.
4.2

N OVEL AND RECONSTRUCTION LATENTS

Using SAE stitching, we want to find out whether latents in larger SAEs are just more fine-grained
versions of latents of smaller SAEs, or whether they represent novel information that is missed by
the smaller SAEs. If we stitch a latent from a larger SAE into a smaller SAE and the reconstruction
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 4: Change in MSE when adding each feature from GPT2-1536 to GPT2-768, plotted against
the maximum cosine similarity of that feature to any feature in GPT2-768. Features with cosine
similarity less than 0.7 tend to improve MSE, while more redundant features hurt performance. A
few extreme outliers with very high cosine similarity and effect on MSE are not visible in this plot.

performance improves, this indicates that the latent is adding new information to the smaller SAE.
If the reconstruction performance worsens instead, this indicates that the latent is overlapping and
the stitched SAE is now representing the same information twice. In this case, we can instead swap
the latent from the smaller SAE with its corresponding latents from the larger SAE.
However, evaluating all combinations of latents when stitching two SAEs is computationally infeasible. Bricken et al. (2023) finds that the decoder directions of latents with similar behavior across
SAEs of different sizes form local clusters with high cosine similarity. As such, we propose thresholding on the maximum decoder cosine similarity metric as a heuristic to classify latents into the
dec
two categories, i.e. for an SAE decoder direction W1,i
, the feature is assigned to the novel group if

max
j

dec
dec
W1,i
· W0,j
dec
dec
∥W1,i
∥∥W0,j
∥

!
<θ

(6)

dec
where W0,j
represents any decoder direction in W0dec . If the maximum cosine similarity is larger
than the threshold, it is assigned to the reconstruction group. Figure 4 shows the relationship between
cosine similarity and the effect on the reconstruction loss of independently stitching that feature for
a pair of GPT-2 SAEs. In our experiments we set the cosine threshold to 0.7 for the GPT-2 SAEs,
and 0.4 for the Gemmascope SAEs, based on our exploratory analysis. Appendix Figure 13 shows
the ROC curve for using different thresholds to predict the effect of adding a latent based on the
maximum cosine similarity.

Inserting reconstruction latents into the target SAE decreases the performance due to overlapping
functionality. We resolve this by removing latents in the target SAE that have a high cosine similarity
to the ones we are inserting, effectively swapping them with similar latents. To select which latents
we swap, we construct a bipartite graph where latents from the smaller SAE form one set of vertices
and latents from the larger SAE form the other. We connect latents if they have a decoder cosine
similarity above the threshold. For each connected subgraph, the latents from the smaller SAE
can be swapped by their corresponding connected latents in the larger SAE (see Appendix A.4 for
examples of connected subgraphs).
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 5:
Interpolating between SAE pairs of increasing dictionary size
(768→1536→3072→6144→12288) through two steps per phase: adding novel latents (increasing L0) then swapping groups of reconstruction latents (decreasing L0 on average). Both steps
on average improve reconstruction (MSE). The L0 and MSE are averages over input samples.

Figure 5 shows four transitions between pairs of SAEs of increasing size. For each transition, we
first identify novel latents from the larger SAE and add them one by one, increasing the average
L0 since we are inserting extra latents. We then identify groups of related reconstruction latents
as defined by our bipartite graph and swap each group - removing similar latents from the smaller
SAE and replacing them with their counterparts in the larger SAE. This decreases L0 on average
since the larger SAE represents similar information more sparsely. Each step leads on average to
improved reconstruction performance, allowing us to interpolate between different SAEs in terms
of dictionary size, sparsity, and reconstruction performance.
The existence of the novel group of latents demonstrates that smaller SAEs are incomplete, and that
larger SAE learn features that are missed by the smaller SAE. The reconstruction group seems to
largely reconstruct the same features as the latents in the smaller SAE, but uses more features to
achieve lower sparsity (Appendix Figure 14). In some cases, a single latent splits into two more
specific latents - this is the feature splitting observed in Bricken et al. (2023). However, we find
some reconstruction group latents have high decoder cosine similarity to multiple latents in the
smaller SAE, suggesting the large SAE latent is an interpolation or composition of the smaller SAE
latents (Appendix A.4). This supports the predictions of Wattenberg & Viégas (2024); Bricken
et al. (2023); Anders et al. (2024) that the sparsity penalty results in the undesirable composition
of features that may be sparser, but do not add any new information. We explore this phenomenon
further in Section 5.

5

M ETA -SAE S

In Section 4, we demonstrated through SAE stitching that increasing dictionary size leads to larger
SAEs learning not only novel features, but also reconstruction latents that encode similar information
to the latents in smaller SAEs. We found that some of these reconstruction latents have high cosine
similarity with multiple latents in the smaller SAE, see Appendix A.4. This suggests that these
smaller SAE latents are composing into more complex latents, such as in the example of a latent
representing “blue” and another latent representing “square” combining in a “blue square”-latent
(see Figure 2). If large SAE features are indeed compositions rather than atomic, it may be possible
to decompose them into more fundamental units.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 1: Example GPT-2 SAE latents and their meta-latent decompositions, with model-generated
explanations (human-summarized) of what the latents activate on. More latent decompositions can
be found on our interactive dashboard: https://metasaes.streamlit.app
SAE Latent Description
Albert Einstein
Rugby
Android Operating System

Meta-Latent Descriptions
Science & Scientists, Famous People, Space & Astronomy, Germany,
Electricity, Words starting with a capital E
Sports activities, Words starting with ‘R’, References to Ireland, References to sports leagues, activities & actions
Mobile phones, operating systems, Californian cities

To decompose the latents of larger SAEs, we introduce meta-SAEs. Meta-SAEs are SAEs trained to
reconstruct the decoder directions Widec of a standard SAE using a dictionary of meta-latents, rather
than reconstructing network activations. That is, we treat the latents Widec as the training data for
our meta-SAE. We find that meta-latents and meta-SAE decompositions are interpretable, with the
meta-latents being monosemantic. Table 1 provides some examples of meta-SAE decompositions.
The latents of meta-SAEs have similar decoder directions to those found in SAEs of comparable size
trained directly on the same network activations. This observation further supports the hypothesis
that larger SAE latents are not entirely new features but may be compositions of features already
learned, albeit less precisely, by smaller models.
We use the BatchTopK SAE (Bussmann et al., 2024) to train our meta-SAEs. We train our metaSAE on the decoder directions of the GPT-2 SAE with dictionary size 49152. The meta-SAE has a
dictionary size of 2304 meta-latents, with on average 4 of meta-latents active per SAE latent. Due
to small number of training samples for the meta-SAE (49152), the meta-SAE is trained for 2000
epochs. We use the Adam optimizer with learning rate 1e-4 and a batch size of 4096. After training,
the meta-SAE explains 55.47% of the variance of the decoder directions of the SAE.
5.1

E VALUATING M ETA -SAE D ECOMPOSITIONS

We follow the lead of (Bills et al., 2023; Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024b) in evaluating neural network and SAE latents using automated interpretability with
LLMs.
First, we generate explanations of SAE latents by presenting GPT-4o-mini with a list of input sequences that activate an SAE latent to varying degrees, and prompting it to generate a natural language explanation of the feature consistent with the activations. Second, we collect all of the SAE
latents on which a meta-SAE latent is active, and prompt again with the explanation and a number
of top activating examples of each of the SAE latents, asking the model to provide an explanation of
the common behavior of the SAE latents, which becomes the meta-SAE latent explanation.
We evaluate the meta-SAE latent explanations in a zero-shot multiple-choice-question setting. For a
given latent we prompt GPT-4o-mini with the explanations of the meta-SAE latents that are active on
that latent, and ask it to choose which of 5 SAE latent explanations most relate to the explanations
of the meta-SAE latents. One of these SAE latent explanations is of the correct latent, with the
remaining 4 explanations corresponding to random latents from the SAE. On a random sample of
1,000 SAE latents, GPT-4o-mini chose the correct answer of the five options 73% of the time.
5.2

C OMPARISON TO S MALLER SAE L ATENTS

In Section 4, we hypothesised that latents in larger SAEs can be described as the composition of
latents in smaller SAEs. We find that meta-SAEs learn similar latents to similar sized SAEs trained
on the original reconstruction problem. Plots of the maximum cosine similarity between meta-SAE
latents and latents from SAEs of different sizes are shown in Figure 6. We validate this by replacing meta-SAE decoder directions with the most similar SAE decoder direction, and retrained the
encoder. This results in only a small decrease in meta-SAE reconstruction performance (Appendix
Figure 20). This suggests that larger SAE latents are indeed composed of latents from smaller SAEs.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 6: Cosine similarity between SAE latents and meta-SAE latents. Note the high maximum
cosine similarity between latents from a meta-SAE with 2304 latents, and a standard SAE with 3072
latents.

6

C ONCLUSION

Our findings challenge the idea that SAEs can discover a canonical set of features. Through SAE
stitching, we demonstrated that smaller SAEs are incomplete, missing information that novel features in larger SAEs capture. Moreover, our meta-SAE experiments showed that, due to the sparsity
penalty, latents in larger SAEs are often not atomic but compositions of interpretable meta-latents.
These findings suggest that there is no single SAE width at which it learns a unique and complete
dictionary of atomic features that can be used to explain the behavior of the model.
These results imply that rather than converging on a unique, complete, and irreducible set of features,
SAEs of different sizes offer varying granularities and compositions of features. This indicates that
the choice of SAE size should be guided by the specific interpretability task at hand, accepting that
no single SAE configuration provides a universal solution. However, our methods neither identify
canonical units of analysis, nor the size of dictionary to use for a given task. Furthermore, our work
only studies two LLMs and does not include very large SAEs, such as in Templeton (2024). We also
acknowledge that the use of SAEs in mechanistic interpretability is nascent, and whilst early results
are encouraging, associating the learned latents of SAEs with interpretable concepts is still an open
problem. In conclusion, our research suggests that alternative methods are required for identifying
canonical units, and that SAE practitioners should embrace a pragmatic approach towards choosing
dictionary size when using SAEs on interpretability tasks such as probing, unlearning and steering.

R EFERENCES
Evan
Anders,
Clement
Neo,
Jason
Hoelscher-Obermaier,
and
Jessica
N.
Howard.
Sparse autoencoders find composed features in small toy models.
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/a5wwqza2cY3W7L9cj/
sparse-autoencoders-find-composed-features-in-small-toy, 2024.
Anonymous. Evaluating sparse autoencoders on concept removal tasks, 2024. URL https://
github.com/anonymous664422. Upcoming work, unofficially published.
Yamini Bansal, Preetum Nakkiran, and Boaz Barak. Revisiting model stitching to compare neural
representations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:225–236, 2021.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in language models. URL https://openaipublic. blob. core. windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.
html.(Date accessed: 14.05. 2023), 2, 2023.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, et al. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2, 2023.
Bart Bussmann, Patrick Leask, and Neel Nanda. Batchtopk sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.06410, 2024.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
2023.
Jacob Dunefsky, Philippe Chlenski, and Neel Nanda. Transcoders find interpretable llm feature
circuits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11944, 2024.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022.
Joshua Engels, Isaac Liao, Eric J Michaud, Wes Gurnee, and Max Tegmark. Not all language model
features are linear. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14860, 2024.
Leo Gao, Tom Dupré la Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.04093, 2024.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
associations in auto-regressive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14767, 2023.
Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent space and time. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.
Connor Kissane, Robert Krzyzanowski, Joseph Isaac Bloom, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda. Interpreting attention layer outputs with sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17759,
2024.
Honglak Lee, Chaitanya Ekanadham, and Andrew Ng. Sparse deep belief net model for visual area
v2. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Karel Lenc and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding image representations by measuring their equivariance and equivalence. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 991–999, 2015.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13382, 2022.
Tom Lieberum, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Nicolas Sonnerat, Vikrant
Varma, János Kramár, Anca Dragan, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Gemma scope: Open sparse
autoencoders everywhere all at once on gemma 2, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2408.05147.
Johnny Lin. Neuronpedia: Interactive reference and tooling for analyzing neural networks, 2023.
URL https://www.neuronpedia.org. Software available from neuronpedia.org.
Aleksandar Makelov, George Lange, and Neel Nanda. Towards principled evaluations of sparse
autoencoders for interpretability and control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08366, 2024.
Alireza Makhzani and Brendan Frey. k-sparse autoencoders, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1312.5663.
Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
Sparse feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19647, 2024.
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
associations in gpt. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17359–17372, 2022.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05217, 2023.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy
employed by v1? Vision research, 37(23):3311–3325, 1997.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Tom Lieberum, Vikrant Varma, János
Kramár, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Improving dictionary learning with gated sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16014, 2024a.
Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Tom Lieberum, Nicolas Sonnerat, Arthur Conmy, Vikrant Varma, János
Kramár, and Neel Nanda. Jumping ahead: Improving reconstruction fidelity with jumprelu sparse
autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14435, 2024b.
Lewis Smith.
The ‘strong’ feature hypothesis could be wrong.
//www.alignmentforum.org/posts/tojtPCCRpKLSHBdpn/
the-strong-feature-hypothesis-could-be-wrong, [Accessed
2024.

https:
23-09-2024],

Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. Gemma
2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.
Adly Templeton. Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet.
Anthropic, 2024.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
Martin Wattenberg and Fernanda B Viégas. Relational composition in neural networks: A survey
and call to action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14662, 2024.

A

A PPENDIX / SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

A.1

G LOSSARY OF T ERMS

Active Latents (L0): For an input x and SAE activation function f (x), the
Pnumber of non-zero
elements in f (x). Typically measured as average L0 across a batch: L0 = n1 i ∥f (xi )∥0 .
Canonical Unit: Hypothetical, fundamental building blocks of a LLMs computation that are
unique, complete, and atomic.
Cross-Entropy Degradation: The increase in cross-entropy loss when replacing the model activations with the reconstruction of the SAE.
Decoder Directions: The columns of the decoder matrix W dec that map from latent to input space.
Two decoder directions with high cosine similarity suggest related features.
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Dictionary Size: The dimensionality of the latent space in an SAE, determining the maximum
number of unique features that can be learned.
Feature Splitting: A phenomenon where a broad latent learned by a smaller SAE splits into more
fine-grained latents in a larger SAE.
Latent: The encoder-decoder pair corresponding to single element in the SAE’s dictionary, i.e. a
learned feature of the SAE rather than a feature of the data.
Mechanistic Interpretability: The study of reverse-engineering neural networks into interpretable algorithms, focusing on identifying and understanding computational features and circuits.
Meta-latents: Features learned by a meta-SAE when trained on the decoder directions of another
SAE.
Monosemantic: Property of a feature that responds selectively to a single coherent concept. Contrasts with polysemantic features.
Novel Latents: Features in a larger SAE with maximum cosine similarity below threshold θ to
any feature in a smaller SAE, indicating capture of previously unrepresented information.
Polysemanticity: The phenomenon where individual neurons or features respond to multiple unrelated concepts.
Reconstruction Latents: Features in a larger SAE with maximum cosine similarity above threshold θ to features in a smaller SAE, representing refined or specialized versions of existing features.
Residual Stream: In the context of transformer architectures, the residual stream refers to the
main information flow that bypasses the self-attention and feed-forward layers through residual
connections.
SAE Stitching: A technique for analyzing feature relationships across SAEs of different sizes by
systematically transferring latents based on decoder similarity.
Sparsity Coefficient (λ): Hyperparameter in the loss function of some SAE architectures L =
∥x − x̂∥2 + λS(f (x)) controlling the trade-off between reconstruction accuracy and activation sparsity.
TopK: A sparsification approach that maintains exactly k non-zero activations per input by zeroing
all but the k largest values: TopK(x)i = xi if xi is among k largest elements, 0 otherwise.
A.2

SAE VARIANTS

ReLU SAEs (Bricken et al., 2023) use the L1-norm S(f ) := ||f ||1 as an approximation to the
L0-norm for the sparsity penalty. This provides a gradient for training unlike the L0-norm, but
suppresses latent activations harming reconstruction performance (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a).
Furthermore, the L1 penalty can be arbitrarily reduced through reparameterization by scaling the
decoder parameters, which is resolved in Bricken et al. (2023) by constraining the decoder directions
to the unit norm. Resolving this tension between activation sparsity and value is the motivation
behind more recent architecture variants.
TopK SAEs (Gao et al., 2024; Makhzani & Frey, 2014) enforce sparsity by retaining only the top k
activations per sample. The encoder is defined as:
f (x) := TopK(Wenc x + benc )

(7)

where TopK zeroes out all but the k largest activations in each sample. This approach eliminates the
need for an explicit sparsity penalty but imposes a rigid constraint on the number of active latents
12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

per sample. An auxiliary loss Laux = ||e − ê||2 is used to avoid dead latents, where ê = W dec z is
the reconstruction using only the top-kaux dead latents (usually 512), this loss is scaled by a small
coefficient α (usually 1/32).
BatchTopK SAEs Bussmann et al. (2024) relaxes the top-k constraint of TopK SAEs to the batch
level during training, i.e. retaining the top b ∗ k activations per batch where b is the size of the
batch. This introduces a dependency between samples in the batch, so at test time a global threshold
parameter θ, estimated on the training data, is used instead, with only activations above this threshold
being retained.
θ = EX [min{zi,j (X)|zi,j (X) > 0}]

(8)

JumpReLU SAEs (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024b) replace the standard ReLU activation function
with the JumpReLU activation, defined as
JumpReLUθ (z) := zH(z − θ)

(9)

where H is the Heaviside step function, and θ is a learned parameter for each SAE latent, below
which the activation is set to zero. JumpReLU SAEs are trained using a loss function that combines
L2 reconstruction error with an L0 sparsity penalty, using straight-through estimators to train despite
the discontinuous activation function. A major drawback of the sparsity penalty used in JumpReLU
SAEs compared to (Batch)TopK SAEs is that it is not possible to set an explicit sparsity and targeting a specific sparsity involves costly hyperparameter tuning. While evaluating JumpReLU SAEs,
Rajamanoharan et al. (2024b) chose the SAEs from their sweep that were closest to the desired
sparsity level, but this resulted in SAEs with significantly different sparsity levels being directly
compared. JumpReLU SAEs use no auxiliary loss function.
A.3

E XAMPLE LATENTS

Figure 7 shows a histogram of the maximum decoder cosine similarity for each latent in GPT2-1536
over all latents in GPT2-768. On the right-hand-side, there is a cluster of latents with high cosine
similarity.
Bricken et al. (2023) use the cosine similarity between latent activations as a measure for latent
similarity. However, we use decoder cosine similarity due its lower computational cost and because
it captures the latent’s effect on the reconstruction. Empirically, we find a high correlation between
these two metrics at values of decoder similarity relevant to our stitching experiments (see Figure
8).

Figure 7: Distribution of maximum cosine similarities between decoder weights of latents in GPT21536 and GPT2-768. Many latents in the larger SAE have high similarity to latents in the smaller
SAE, but there is also a long tail of novel latents.
13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 8: The activation similarity by the decoder cosine similarity on the GPT2-768 and GPT21536 SAEs. At high values of cosine similarity (> 0.5) the coefficient of determination between
these is 0.87.
Figure 9 and Figure 10 show feature dashboards from Neuronpedia (Lin, 2023). Feature dashboards
are a popular method to visualize and interpret SAE latents, see also Bricken et al. (2023). These
dashboards show tokens in input sentences that maximally activate a certain latent in green, and the
tokens they boost (in blue) and suppress most (in red).
Figure 9 shows an example of a latent from GPT-1536 and a latent from GPT-768 that have a cosine
similarity of 0.99. We see that both of these latents activate strongly on the same inputs, and boost
similar logits.

Figure 9: Neuronpedia dashboard of example latents with high cosine similarity. (Redacted URL)
However, GPT2-1536 has a latent for “make sure” that has no counterpart in GPT-768. The nearest
latents have a decoder cosine similarity of around 0.3, and are shown in

14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 10: Example GPT2-1536 latent with no similar latent in GPT-768, with the three most similar
latents shown. (Redacted URL)
We evaluate the reconstruction performance of the two SAEs on inputs where this latent is active
and inactive. The reconstruction performance of the smaller SAE is considerably worse on inputs
where this larger SAE latent is active, compared to inputs where the latent is not active.

GPT2-1536
GPT2-768

Latent inactive
2.225
2.703

Latent active
2.518
3.292

Difference
0.293
0.589

Averaging this metric across all 657 latents in GPT-1536 that have low maximum cosine similarity
with all latents in GPT-768, we see a similar pattern (Figure 11)

Figure 11: Reconstruction MSE of SAEs on inputs where novel latents in the larger SAE are active
and inactive

15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

A.4

L ATENT FAMILIES

Figure 12: Connected subgraphs of the bipartite graph of latent in GPT2-768 and GPT2-1536.
A.5

O PEN SOURCE SAE WEIGHTS

All GPT-2 Small SAEs were trained on the layer 8 residual stream, which was chosen in line with
Gao et al. (2024). They were trained for 300M tokens on the OpenWebText dataset, which was
processed into sequences of a maximum of 128 tokens for input into the language models. All
models were trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 4 × 10−4 , β1 = 0.9, and β2 =
0.99. The batch size used was 4096 and all were trained with a sparsity penalty of 8 × 10−5 . The
GPT-2 SAEs are available on Neuronpedia at Redacted URL. We also use two of the Gemma Scope
SAEs (Lieberum et al., 2024) trained on Gemma 2 2B (Team et al., 2024) with dictionary size 16384
and 32768. We used the TransformerLens (https://transformerlensorg.github.io/
TransformerLens/) implementations of GPT-2 and Gemma 2 2B. CELR is the cross entropy
loss recovered from either zero or mean ablation.

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 2: Properties of the SAEs used in this study.
Name
GPT2-768
GPT2-1536
GPT2-3072
GPT2-6144
GPT2-12288
GPT2-24576
GPT2-49152
GPT2-98304
GemmaScope-16384
GemmaScope-32768
A.6

Model
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
gpt2-small
Gemma 2 2B
Gemma 2 2B

Dict. size
768
1536
3072
6144
12288
24576
49152
98304
16384
32768

L0
35.2
39.5
42.4
43.8
43.9
42.9
42.4
43.9
43.4
41.5

MSE
2.72
2.22
1.89
1.63
1.46
1.33
1.21
1.14
1.72
1.59

CELR Zero
0.915
0.942
0.955
0.965
0.971
0.975
0.978
0.980
0.983
0.985

CELR Mean
0.876
0.915
0.937
0.949
0.958
0.963
0.967
0.970
0.980
0.982

S TITCHING EXPERIMENTS

Figure 13: Based on the maximum cosine similarity it is possible to predict the direction of the effect
of adding a latent to another SAE. The Receiver operating curve (ROC) is created by varying the
threshold of maximum cosine similarity to classify a latent as novel latent or reconstruction latent.

Figure 14: Effects on MSE and L0 when swapping reconstruction latents from larger SAEs to
smaller ones. Swapping latent structures generally increases the MSE but almost always decreases
L0. Outliers are not shown. The percentual effects per swap get smaller for larger models as the
effects are distributed over more swaps.

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 15: Percentage change of MSE of adding in latents from a larger SAE to a smaller SAE in
a random order. Adding in all the latents with cosine similarity ≤ 0.7 from GPT-1536 in GPT-768
reduces the MSE by almost 10%.

(b) Proportion of reconstruction latents in SAEs
of different size. X and Y labels are exponential
expansion factors, or equivalently row indices in
Table 2.

(a) Proportion of reconstruction latents in GPT-2
SAEs with 3072 latents. X and Y labels are random training seeds.

Figure 16: Proportion of reconstruction latents between GPT-2 SAEs of the same size and different
sizes.
We compared the proportion of reconstruction latents between SAEs of the same size and SAEs of
different sizes. We found that when comparing SAEs with the same size, 94% of the latents are
reconstruction latents (cosine similarity > 0.7). These results are displayed in Figure 16.
A concern when stitching two different SAEs is the choice of bdec . However, in practice we find
that the bdec s of SAEs trained on the same latents are very similar (minimum cosine similarity of
0.9970, differing by less than 0.1% in magnitude). Figure 17 shows that the decoder biases can be
18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 17: Reconstruction performance (MSE) of SAEs of different sizes when their bdec s are
replaced with the bdec s of SAEs with a different dictionary size.
exchanged in the stitching process with negligible impact on the reconstruction performance of an
SAE.
A.6.1

S TITCHING IN G EMMA S COPE SAE S

In order to validate that the SAE stitching results are not an artifact of GPT-2 small or the SAEs that
we trained, we applied the same methods to the open-source Gemma Scope SAEs. In particular, we
compared two SAEs trained on the residual stream of layer 12 of Gemma 2 2B. The first SAE has
dictionary size 16384 (average L0 41) and the second SAE has dictionary size 32768.
We find a lower threshold for distinguishing novel features from reconstruction features (0.4). Using
this threshold, we can also smoothly interpolate between SAEs of different sizes trained on Gemma2-2B.

Figure 18: Change in MSE when adding each feature from GemmaScope-32k to GemmaScope-16k,
plotted against the maximum cosine similarity of that feature to any feature in GemmaScope-16k.
Features with cosine similarity less than 0.4 tend to improve MSE, while more redundant features
hurt performance.

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 19: By first adding in novel latents from Gemma Scope 32k to Gemma Scope 16k and
replacing the remaining latents with their similar latents in the larger SAE, we interpolate between
the two SAE siezs.
A.7

M ETA SAE A DDITIONAL F IGURES

Figure 20: Change in reconstruction performance of a meta-SAE when its decoder directions are
replaced with the most similar decoder direction from an SAE with a similar dictionary size.
A.8

I NTERPRETABILITY E XPERIMENTS

In this paper, we demonstrate that larger SAEs may learn more narrow, composed concepts in order to improve sparsity rather than just learning concepts that are missing in smaller SAEs. Here,
we provide some experimental results on sparse probing Gao et al. (2024) and concept removal
benchmarks (Anonymous, 2024)1 .
A.8.1

S PARSE P ROBING

Similarly to Gao et al. (2024), we use sparse probes to evaluate the presence of known ground-truth
features in our SAEs. If we expect a specific feature to be discovered by an SAE, then a metric for
autoencoder quality is simply checking whether these features are present as latents. We do this by
1
(Anonymous, 2024) is a benchmarking suite that is currently being developed, to which the researchers
were kind enough to grant us early access to benchmark the models in this paper. This work is scheduled
to be officially published in early December, well before the decision, and this section will be updated in the
camera-ready with a clear citation to that work. We refer to the upcoming work in order to avoid confusion or
claiming any credit for that research. The paper and code can be temporarily accessed for the duration of the
review period at https://github.com/anonymous664422

20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

training a 1-dimensional logistic probe on the activations of the SAE to predict the presence of the
feature. We use the benchmark datasets included in (Anonymous, 2024) in our evaluation. These
cover a range of domains, for example predicting the sentiment of Amazon reviews or predicting the
language of the text from the SAE activations.
In our experiments we use a probe that uses only a single SAE latent in its prediction. The results of
these experiments are visualized in Figure 21. They show that the relationship between the size of
the SAE and the evaluation accuracy is complex and dataset dependent.

Figure 21: Sparse probing evaluation accuracy by GPT-2 SAE dictionary size across 8 benchmark
datasets, with a sparse probe using the top latent.

21

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 22: Sparse probing evaluation accuracy by GPT-2 SAE dictionary size across 8 benchmark
datasets, with a sparse probe using the top 50 latents.
A.8.2

C ONCEPT R EMOVAL

In the SHIFT method (Marks et al., 2024), a human evaluator debiases a classifier by ablating SAE
latents. (Anonymous, 2024) operationalizes SHIFT into an evaluation for SAE quality, Targeted
Probe Perturbation, by training probes on model activations and measuring the effect of ablating
sets of SAE latents on the probe accuracy. Ablating a disentangled set of latents should have an
isolated causal effect on one class probe, while leaving other class probes unaffected.
They consider a dataset with M classes. For each class with index i = 1, . . . , M they select the set
Li of the most relevant SAE latents. To select those latents, binary probes are trained detecting the
concept c from model activations. The attribution score of latent with index l on concept c is given
by
I(L, c) = (Lpos − Lneg )(dl · P)
(10)
where L denotes the batch of activations of latent l, dl denotes the SAE decoder vector corresponding to l, P is the weight matrix of the binary probe, Lpos is the mean activation of the latent for
inputs of the targeted concept, and Lneg is the mean activation for inputs unrelated to the concept.
The latents with the highest attribution score are those select as most relevant.
For each concept ci , they partition the dataset into samples of the targeted concept and a random mix
of all other labels. They define the model with probe corresponding to class cj with j = 1, . . . , M
as a linear classifier Cj . Further, Ci,j denotes a classifier for cj where latents Li are ablated. Then,
they iteratively evaluate the accuracy Ai,j of all linear classifiers Ci,j on the dataset partitioned for
the corresponding class cj . The targeted probe perturbation score
STPP = mean(i=j) (Ai,j ) − mean(i̸=j) (Ai,j )

(11)

represents the effectiveness of causally isolating a single probe. Ablating a disentangled set of
features should only show a significant accuracy decrease if i = j, namely if the latents selected for
class i are ablated in the classifier of the same class i, and remain constant if i ̸= j
The results of this evaluation by SAE dictionary size is displayed in Figure 23. Whilst here there is
a general downward trend, the accuracy is not monotonically decreasing with SAE size.

22

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 23: TPP evaluation accuracy by GPT-2 SAE dictionary size across 2 benchmark datasets,
ablating up to 50 latents.

23

